.. _Contributed-Apm-Structure:

========================
Optical Spectroscopy
========================

.. index::
   Contributed-Apm-Introduction
   Contributed-Apm-Definitions
   Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-Introduction
   Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-Status-Quo
   Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-Application-Definitions
   Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-German-NFDI

.. _Contributed-Apm-Introduction:

Introduction
##############

:ref:`Application definitions <appdef-apm-definitions>` (specifically :ref:`NXapm`) and :ref:`base classes <bc-apm-classes>`
to describe atom probe microscopy experiments are already part of the NeXus standard. In addition, there are several 
contributed definitions that are currently under discussion.

.. _Contributed-Apm-Definitions:

Base Classes
------------

Several instances of :ref:`NXprocess` were defined in :ref:`NXapm` to document processing of atom probe data
including hit finding, voltage-and-bowl correction, combinatorial recovery of charge states, reconstruction,
and ranging definitions. These base classes are examples that substantiate that data processing steps are
essential when transforming atom probe measurements or simulations into knowledge. Consequently, these
steps should be documented to enable reproducible research, if possible even numerical reproducibility
of the results,  and to learn better the workflow. In what follows, an example is presented how an
open-source community software can be modified to use descriptions of these computational steps.

A detailed inspection of spatial and other type of filters frequently used in analysis of atom probe
data revealed that it is better to define atom-probe-agnostic reusable concepts for filters:

    :ref:`NXspatial_filter`:
        A base class proposing how a point cloud can be spatially filtered in a specific yet general manner.
        This base class takes advantage of :ref:`NXcg_ellipsoid`, :ref:`NXcg_cylinder`, and :ref:`NXcg_hexahedron`
        to cater for commonly used geometric primitives in atom probe.
        The primitives are used for defining the shape and extent of a region of interest (ROI).

    :ref:`NXsubsampling_filter`:
        A base class for a filter that can also be used for specifying how entries
        like ions can be filtered via sub-sampling.

    :ref:`NXmatch_filter`:
        A base class for a filter that can also be used for specifying how entries
        like ions can be filtered based on their type or other descriptors like hit multiplicity.


.. _Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-Introduction:

Tools and applications in APM
#############################

There exist several research software tools in the APM community that deal with handling and analyzing APM data.

One of these is the `paraprobe-toolbox <https://paraprobe-toolbox.readthedocs.io/>`_
The software is developed by `M. Kühbach et al. <https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13510>`_.

The paraprobe-toolbox is an example of an open-source parallelized software for analyzing
point cloud data, for assessing meshes in 3D continuum space, and for studying the effects of
parameterization on descriptors of micro- and nanoscale structural features (crystal defects)
within materials when characterized and studied with atom probe.

There is a set of contributed application definitions describing each computational step in the 
paraprobe-toolbox. These were added to describe the whole workflow in this particular software,
but also can act as a blueprint for how computational steps of other software tool (including commercial 
ones) could be developed further to benefit from NeXus.

The need for a thorough documentation of the tools was motivated by several needs:

First, users of software would like to better understand and also be able to study for themselves
which individual parameters and settings for each tool exist and how configuring these
affects analyses quantitatively. This stresses the aspect how to improve documentation.

Second, scientific software like paraprobe-toolbox implement numerical/algorithmical
(computational) workflows whereby data coming from multiple input sources
(like previous analysis results) are processed and carried through more involved analyses
within several steps inside the tool. The tool then creates output as files. This
provenance and workflow should be documented.

Individual tools of paraprobe-toolbox are developed in C/C++ and/or Python.
Provenance tracking is useful as it is one component and requirement for making
workflows exactly numerically reproducible and thus to enable reproducibility (the "R"
of the FAIR principles of data stewardship).

For tools of the paraprobe-toolbox each workflow step is a pair or triple of sub-steps:
1. The creation of a configuration file. 
2. The actual analysis using the Python/or C/C++ tools. 
3. The optional analyses/visualization of the results based on data in NeXus/HDF5 files generated by each tool. 

.. _Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-Status-Quo:

What has been achieved so far?
##############################

This proposal summarizes work of members of the FAIRmat project, which is part of the `German
National Research Data Infrastructure <https://www.nfdi.de/?lang=en>`_. The here detailed
proposal documents how all tools of the paraprobe-toolbox were modified to generate
only well-defined configuration files as accepted input and yield specifically formatted output
files according to the following NeXus application definitions.

Data and metadata between the tools are exchanged with NeXus/HDF5 files. This means that data
inside HDF5 binary containers are named, formatted, and hierarchically structured according
to application definitions.

For example the application definition :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_surfacer`: specifies
how a configuration file for the paraprobe-surfacer tool should be formatted
and which parameters it contains including optionality and cardinality constraints.

Thereby, each config file uses a controlled vocabulary of terms. Furthermore,
the config files store a SHA256 checksum for each input file. This implements a full
provenance tracking on the input files along the workflow.

As an example, a user may first range their reconstruction and then compute spatial
correlation functions. The config file for the ranging tool stores the files
which hold the reconstructed ion position and ranging definitions.
The ranging tool generates a results file with the labels of each molecular ion.
This results file is formatted according to the tool-specific `results`
application definition. The generated results file and the reconstruction is
imported by the spatial statistics tool which again keeps track of all files
and reports its results in a spatial statistics tool results file.

This design makes it possible to rigorously trace which numerical results were achieved
with specific inputs and settings using specifically-versioned tools. Noteworthy
this includes Y-junction on a graph which is where multiple input sources are
combined to generate new results.

Defining, documenting, using, and sharing application definitions is a useful and future-proof 
strategy for software development and data analyses as it enables automated provenance
tracking which happens silently in the background.

Base classes have been defined to group common pieces of information for each tool of the
toolbox. For each tool we define a pair of base classes. One for the configuration (input) side
and one for the results (output) side.

.. _Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-Application-Definitions:

Application Definitions
#######################

NXapm_paraprobe application definitions are in fact pairs of application definitions.
One for the configuration (input) side and one for the results (output) side. For each
tool one such pair is proposed:

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_transcoder`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_transcoder`:
        Configuration and the results respectively of the paraprobe-transcoder tool.
        Load POS, ePOS, APSuite APT, RRNG, RNG, and NeXus NXapm files.
        Store reconstructed positions, ions, and charge states.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_ranger`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_ranger`:
        Configuration and results respectively of the paraprobe-ranger tool.
        Apply ranging definitions and explore possible molecular ions.
        Store applied ranging definitions and combinatorial analyses of possible iontypes.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_selector`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_selector`:
        Configuration and results respectively of the paraprobe-selector tool.
        Defining complex spatial regions-of-interest to filter reconstructed datasets.
        Store which points are inside or on the boundary of complex spatial regions-of-interest.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_surfacer`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_surfacer`:
        Configuration and results respectively of the paraprobe-surfacer tool.
        Create a model for the edge of a point cloud via convex hulls, alpha shapes, or alpha-wrappings.
        Store triangulated surface meshes of models for the edge of a dataset.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_distancer`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_distancer`:
        Configuration and results respectively of the paraprobe-distancer tool.
        Compute and store analytical distances between ions to a set of triangles.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_tessellator`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_tessellator`:
        Configuration and results respectively of the paraprobe-tessellator tool.
        Compute and store Voronoi cells and properties of these for all ions in a dataset.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_spatstat`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_spatstat`:
        Configuration and results respectively of the paraprobe-spatstat tool.
        Compute spatial statistics on the entire or selected regions of the reconstructed dataset.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_clusterer`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_clusterer`:
        Configuration and results resepctively of the paraprobe-clusterer tool.
        Compute cluster analyses with established machine learning algorithms using CPU or GPUs.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_nanochem`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_nanochem`:
        Configuration and results resepctively of the paraprobe-nanochem tool.
        Compute delocalization, iso-surfaces, analyze 3D objects, composition profiles, and mesh interfaces.

    :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_config_intersector`, :ref:`NXapm_paraprobe_results_intersector`:
        Configuration and results resepctively of the paraprobe-intersector tool.
        Analyze volumetric intersections and proximity of 3D objects discretized as triangulated surface meshes
        in continuum space to study the effect the parameterization of surface extraction algorithms on the resulting shape,
        spatial arrangement, and colocation of 3D objects via graph-based techniques.

.. _Contributed-Apm-Paraprobe-German-NFDI:

Joint work German NFDI consortia NFDI-MatWerk and FAIRmat
#######################################################################

Members of the NFDI-MatWerk and the FAIRmat consortium of the German National Research Data Infrastructure
are working together within the Infrastructure Use Case IUC09 of the NFDI-MatWerk project to work on examples
how software tools in both consortia become better documented and interoperable to use. Within this project,
we have also added the `CompositionSpace tool that has been developed at the Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung
GmbH in Düsseldorf <https://github.com/eisenforschung/CompositionSpace>`_ by A. Saxena et al.