manual/source/classes/applications/apm-structure.rst, before:

.. _AppDef-Apm-Structure:

==================================
Atom Probe Microscopy / Tomography
==================================

.. index::
   AppDef-Apm-Introduction
   AppDef-Apm-Definitions

.. _AppDef-Apm-Introduction:

Introduction
############

Set of data schemas to describe the acquisition, i.e. measurement side, the extraction of hits from detector raw data,
steps to compute mass-to-charge state ratios from uncorrected time of flight data, the reconstruction, and the ranging, i.e. identification of peaks in the mass-to-charge-state ratio histogram to detect (molecular) ions.
The data schemas can be useful to generate data artifacts also for field-ion microscopy experiments.

.. _AppDef-Apm-Definitions:

Application Definition
######################

There exists a single application definition to serve atom probe tomography
and field-ion microscopy measurements, i.e. the data collection with the instrument:

    :ref:`NXapm`:
      A general application definition with many detailed places for leaving metadata
      and computational steps described which are commonly used when reporting the
      measurement of atom probe data including also detector hit data, as well as how
      to proceed with reconstructing atom positions from these data, and how to store
      details about definitions made, which describe how mass-to-charge-state ratio
      values are mapped to iontypes in a process called ranging.

Base classes
#######################

A specific set of base classes which are used in the application definition can be found :ref:`here <bc-apm-classes>`.

Commit message:

Grouping of manuals applied to all appdefs and contributed (#412)
* Implementing my suggestion to group application definitions following the call from Aaron to go ahead as you think fits wrt to making the long flat list of definitions easier navigatable, summary one-liners for appdefs missing

* Implementing my suggestion to also group contributed definitions

* Add one-liners for appdefs grouping

* Implemented also suggestion how to group base classes, currently switched on the fall back to have the full listing of classes for each of the three sources (appdef, base, contributed) active for direct comparison, implementation of text in base_classes not yet polished, suggestion is to also do not display legacy classes here but mention that only up to date classes are mentioned, I see value in having the legacy class only accessible via searching as this is not what new people should use and experienced folks can search for this, new developers should rather quickly get an overview of for which the NeXus ontology provides classes. This branch essentially implemented now an approach that could have also been achieved with a tagging mechanism.

* Editing and proof-reading applications§

* Editing and proof-reading contributed definitions

* Editing and proof-reading base classes, I think the proposal is good enough for a refactoring to include in the release

* linting

* linting

* Suggestions from Lukas

* Further suggestions from Lukas

* Refactoring of misc and complete list to an own group in each respective section

* Selectable either classical long_flat_list or that list in an own grouping

---------

Co-authored-by: mkuehbach <markus.kuehbach@physik.hu-berlin.de>

manual/source/classes/applications/apm-structure.rst, after:

.. _AppDef-Apm-Structure:

==================================
Atom Probe Microscopy / Tomography
==================================

.. index::
   AppDef-Apm-Introduction
   AppDef-Apm-Definitions

.. _AppDef-Apm-Introduction:

Introduction
############

Set of data schemas to describe the acquisition, i.e. measurement side, the extraction of hits from detector raw data,
steps to compute mass-to-charge-state ratios from uncorrected time of flight data, the reconstruction, and the ranging
i.e., the identification of peaks in the mass-to-charge-state ratio histogram to detect (molecular) ions.
The data schemas are also useful for reporting field-ion microscopy experiments.

.. _AppDef-Apm-Definitions:

Application Definition
######################

Measurements as well as computer simulations of atom probe tomography and field-ion microscopy research
are standardized with one application definition:

:ref:`NXapm`
    A general application definition with many detailed places for leaving metadata
    and computational steps described which are commonly used when reporting the
    measurement of atom probe data including also detector hit data, as well as how
    to proceed with reconstructing atom positions from these data, and how to store
    details about definitions made which describe how mass-to-charge-state ratio
    values are mapped to (molecular) iontypes in a process called ranging.
