manual/source/classes/applications/mpes-structure.rst, before:

.. _AppDef-Mpes-Structure:

=======================================
Photoemission & core-level spectroscopy
=======================================

.. index::
   AppDef-Mpes-Introduction
   AppDef-Mpes-Definitions


.. _AppDef-Mpes-Introduction:

Introduction
############

These are a set of application definition to describe multidimensional photoemission (MPES) experiments including x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS),
hard x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES), angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), two-photon photoemission (2PPE) 
and photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM). Also includes descriptors for advanced specializations, such as spin-resolution, time resolution, 
near-ambient pressure conditions, dichroism etc.

.. _AppDef-Mpes-Definitions:

Application Definitions
#######################

:ref:`NXmpes`:
   A general application definition with minimalistic metadata requirements, apt to describe all photemission experiments.

:ref:`NXmpes_arpes`:
   An application definition for angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments.

:ref:`NXxps`:
   An application definition for X-ray/UV photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS/UPS) experiments.


Base classes
#######################

A specific set of base classes which are used in these application definitions can be found  :ref:`here <bc-mpes-classes>`.

Commit message:

Grouping of manuals applied to all appdefs and contributed (#412)
* Implementing my suggestion to group application definitions following the call from Aaron to go ahead as you think fits wrt to making the long flat list of definitions easier navigatable, summary one-liners for appdefs missing

* Implementing my suggestion to also group contributed definitions

* Add one-liners for appdefs grouping

* Implemented also suggestion how to group base classes, currently switched on the fall back to have the full listing of classes for each of the three sources (appdef, base, contributed) active for direct comparison, implementation of text in base_classes not yet polished, suggestion is to also do not display legacy classes here but mention that only up to date classes are mentioned, I see value in having the legacy class only accessible via searching as this is not what new people should use and experienced folks can search for this, new developers should rather quickly get an overview of for which the NeXus ontology provides classes. This branch essentially implemented now an approach that could have also been achieved with a tagging mechanism.

* Editing and proof-reading applications§

* Editing and proof-reading contributed definitions

* Editing and proof-reading base classes, I think the proposal is good enough for a refactoring to include in the release

* linting

* linting

* Suggestions from Lukas

* Further suggestions from Lukas

* Refactoring of misc and complete list to an own group in each respective section

* Selectable either classical long_flat_list or that list in an own grouping

---------

Co-authored-by: mkuehbach <markus.kuehbach@physik.hu-berlin.de>

manual/source/classes/applications/mpes-structure.rst, after:

.. _AppDef-Mpes-Structure:

=======================================
Photoemission & core-level spectroscopy
=======================================

.. index::
   AppDef-Mpes-Introduction
   AppDef-Mpes-Definitions


.. _AppDef-Mpes-Introduction:

Introduction
############

These are a set of application definitions to describe multidimensional photoemission (MPES) experiments including x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS),
hard x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES), angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), two-photon photoemission (2PPE) 
and photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM). Also includes descriptors for advanced specializations, such as spin-resolution, time resolution, 
near-ambient pressure conditions, dichroism etc.

.. _AppDef-Mpes-Definitions:

Application Definitions
#######################

:ref:`NXmpes`
   A general application definition with minimalistic metadata requirements,
   apt to describe all photoemission experiments.

:ref:`NXmpes_arpes`
   An application definition for angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments.

:ref:`NXxps`
   An application definition for X-ray/UV photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS/UPS) experiments.


:ref:`NXarpes`
   An application definition for angular resolved photo emission spectroscopy.
   Note that this application definition is only kept for legacy reasons and
   new NeXus ARPES files should use :ref:`NXmpes_arpes`.

Base classes
#######################

A specific set of base classes which are used in these application definitions can be found  :ref:`here <bc-mpes-classes>`.
