manual/source/faq.rst, before:

.. index:: ! FAQ

.. _FAQ:

==========================
Frequently Asked Questions
==========================

This is a list of commonly asked questions concerning the NeXus data format.

#. Is it Nexus, NeXus or NeXuS?

    NeXus is correct. It is a format for data from **Neutron** and **X-ray**
    facilities, hence those first letters are capitalised. The format is also
    used for muon experiments, but there is no *mu* (or m) in NeXus and no s
    in muon. So the s stays in lower case.

#. How many facilities use NeXus?

    This is not easy to say, not all facilities using NeXus actively
    participate in the committee. Some facilities have reported their
    adoption status on the `Facilities web page <https://www.nexusformat.org/Facilities.html>`_.
    Please have a look at this list. Keep in mind that it is never fully complete or up to date.

#. NeXus files are binary? This is crazy! How am I supposed to see my data?

    Various tools are listed in the :ref:`Utilities` section to inspect
    NeXus data files.  The easiest graphical tool to use is
    *HDFview* which can open any HDF file.  Other tools such as *PyMCA*
    and *NeXPy* provide visualization of scientific data while *h5dump*
    and *punx tree* provide text renditions of content and structure.
    If you want to try, for example
    ``nxbrowse``
    is a utility provided by the NeXus community that can be very
    helpful to those who want to inspect their files and avoid
    graphical applications. For larger data volumes the binary backends
    used with the appropriate tools are by far superior in terms of
    efficiency and speed and most users happily accept that after having
    worked with supersized "human readable" files for a while.

#. What on-disk file format should I choose for my data?

    HDF5 is the default file container to use for NeXus data. It
    is the recommended format for all applications. HDF4 is still
    supported as a on disk format for NeXus but for new installations
    preference should be given to HDF5.

#. Why are the NeXus classes so complicated? I'll never store all that information

    The NeXus classes are essentially glossaries of terms. If you
    need to store a piece of information, consult the class definitions
    to see if it has been defined. If so, use it. It is not compulsory
    to include every item that has been defined in the base class if it
    is not relevant to your experiment. On the other hand, a NeXus
    application definition lists a smaller set of compulsory items that
    should allow other researchers or software to analyze your data.
    You should really follow the application definition that
    corresponds to your experiment to take full advantage of NeXus.

#. I don't like NeXus. It seems much faster and simpler to develop
   my own file format. Why should I even consider NeXus?

    If you consider using an efficient on disk storage format,
    HDF5 is a better choice than most others. It is fast and efficient
    and well supported in all mainstream programming languages and a
    fair share of popular analysis packages. The format is so widely
    used and backed by a big organisation that it will continue to be
    supported for the foreseeable future.
    So if you are going to use HDF5 anyway, why not use the NeXus
    definition to lay out the data in a standardised way? The NeXus
    community spent years trying to get the standard right and
    while you will not agree with every single choice they made in the
    past, you should be able to store the data you have in a quite
    reasonable way. If you do not comply with NeXus, chances are most
    people will perceive your format as different but not necessarily
    better than NeXus by any large measure. So it may not be worth the
    effort. Seriously.

    If you encounter any problems because the classes are not
    sufficient to describe your experiment, please contact the
    :ref:`mailing list<NeXus.mailinglist.main>`.
    Pull requests for the definitions repository (for example adding contributed definitions)
    are also welcome (see next question).
    The NIAC is always willing to consider new proposals.

#. I want to :index:`contribute` an application definition.
    How do I go about it?

    Read the :index:`NXDL` Tutorial in :ref:`NXDL_Tutorial-CreatingNxdlSpec`
    and have a try. You can ask for help on the
    :ref:`mailing lists<NeXus.mailinglist.main>`.
    Once you have a definition that is working well for at least your case,
    you can submit it to the NIAC for acceptance as a standard.
    The procedures for acceptance are defined in the NIAC :index:`constitution`. [#]_


	.. [#]
	    Refer to the most recent version of the NIAC constitution on the
	    NIAC web page:
	    https://www.nexusformat.org/NIAC.html#constitution


#. What is the purpose of ``NXdata``?

    ``NXdata`` identifies the :index:`default plottable data <plotting>`.
    This is one of the basic motivations (see :ref:`SimplePlotting`) for the NeXus standard.
    The choice of the name ``NXdata`` is historic and does not really reflect its function.
    The ``NXdata`` group contains data or links to the data stored elsewhere.

#. How do I identify the plottable data?

    See the section: :ref:`Find-Plottable-Data`.

    .. TODO:  What is the intent of this next question?  What defines "reasonable" in this context?
       #. How can I specify reasonable axes for my data?

           ..  Is there a better answer for this?
       	    FIXME: This link leads to the naming rules, not axes specification.  Change it.

           See the section: :ref:`multi-dimensional-data`.

           .. :ref:`DataRules`.

#. Why aren't ``NXsample`` and ``NXmonitor`` groups stored in the ``NXinstrument`` group?

    A NeXus file can contain a number of ``NXentry``
    groups, which may represent different scans in an experiment, or
    sample and calibration runs, etc. In many cases, though by no means
    all, the instrument has the same configuration so that it would be
    possible to save space by storing the  ``NXinstrument``
    group once and using multiple links in the remaining ``NXentry``
    groups. It is assumed that the sample and monitor information would
    be more likely to change from run to run, and so should be stored
    at the top level.

#. Can I use a NXDL specification to parse a NeXus data file?

    This should be possible as there is nothing in the NeXus
    specifications to prevent this but it is not implemented in :index:`NAPI`.
    You would need to implement it for yourself.

#. Do I have to use the ``NAPI`` subroutines?
   Can't I read (or write) the NeXus data files with my own routines?

    You are not required to use the NAPI to write valid NeXus
    data files. It is possible to avoid the NAPI to write and read
    valid NeXus data files. But, the programmer who chooses this path
    must have more understanding of how the NeXus HDF data file
    is written. Validation of data files written without the NAPI is
    strongly encouraged.


#. I'm using links to place data in two places.
   Which one should be the data and which one is the link?

    .. index:: link

    .. note:: NeXus uses HDF5 hard links

	    In HDF, a hard link points to a data object.
	    A soft link points to a directory entry.
	    Since NeXus uses hard links, there is no need to distinguish
	    between two (or more) directory entries that point to the same data.

    Both places have pointers to the actual data.
    That is the way hard links work in HDF5.
    There is no need for a preference to either location.
    NeXus defines a ``target`` attribute to label
    one directory entry as the source of the data (in this, the
    link *target*).  This has value in
    only a few situations such as when
    converting the data from one format to another.  By identifying
    the original in place, duplicate copies of the data are not
    converted.

#. If I write my data according to the current specification for :ref:`NXsas`
    (substitute any other application definition),
    will other software be able to read my data?

    Yes.  :ref:`NXsas`, like other
    :ref:`application.definitions`,
    defines and names the *minimum information*
    required for analysis or data processing.  As long as all the
    information required by the specification is present, analysis software
    should be able to process the data.
    If other information is also present, there is no guarantee that
    small-angle scattering analysis software will notice.

#. Where do I store the wavelength of my experiment?

    See the :ref:`Strategies-wavelength` section.

#. Where do I store metadata about my experiment?

   See the :ref:`where.to.store.metadata` section.

#. What file extension should I use when writing a NeXus data file?

   Any extension is permitted.
   Common extensions are `.h5`, `.hdf`, `.hdf5`, and `.nxs`
   while others are possible.
   See the many examples in the NeXus exampledata repository.
   (https://github.com/nexusformat/exampledata)

#. Can instances of classes inside definitions require
   new fields that were previously optional?

   Yes. That is one of the motivations to have
   application definitions. By default, all content
   in an application definition is required.

   For example, the ``radiation`` field in :ref:`NXcanSAS`
   requires 1 (and only 1) instance.

#. Can instances of classes inside definitions make
   optional new fields that were previously not mentioned?

   Yes. To make it optional, set attribute ``minOccurs="0"``.

   For example, see the ``Idev`` field in :ref:`NXcanSAS`.

#. Can instances of classes inside definitions require
   new fields that were previously not mentioned?

   Yes.

   For example, see the ``qx`` field in :ref:`NXiqproc`.

#. Can we view the process of defining classes within
   an application definition as defining a subclass of
   the original class? That is, all instances of the
   class within the definition are valid instances of
   the original class, but not vice-versa?

   Keep in mind that NeXus is not specifically object oriented.
   The putative super class might be either
   :ref:`NXentry` (for single-technique data, such as SAXS)
   or :ref:`NXsubentry` (for multi-technique data
   such as SAXS/WAXS/USAXS/GIWAXS or SAXS/SANS).

   If you are thinking of a new application definition that uses
   another as a starting point (like a super class), then there
   is an ``extends`` attribute in the definition element of the
   NXDL file (example here from :ref:`NXarpes`)::

       <definition name="NXarpes" extends="NXobject" type="group"

   which describes this relationship. For most (?all?) all NXDL
   files to date, they extend the :ref:`NXobject` base class
   (the base object of NeXus).

Commit message:

Permit simple inheritance for base classes (#1518)
- Adds section on "Inheritance in NeXus" to design.rst
- Changes "In contrast to NeXus base classes, NeXus supports inheritance in application definitions." to "Like base classes, NeXus supports inheritance in application definitions."
- Rewrites the FAQ question on inheritance

manual/source/faq.rst, after:

.. index:: ! FAQ

.. _FAQ:

==========================
Frequently Asked Questions
==========================

This is a list of commonly asked questions concerning the NeXus data format.

#. Is it Nexus, NeXus or NeXuS?

    NeXus is correct. It is a format for data from **Neutron** and **X-ray**
    facilities, hence those first letters are capitalised. The format is also
    used for muon experiments, but there is no *mu* (or m) in NeXus and no s
    in muon. So the s stays in lower case.

#. How many facilities use NeXus?

    This is not easy to say, not all facilities using NeXus actively
    participate in the committee. Some facilities have reported their
    adoption status on the `Facilities web page <https://www.nexusformat.org/Facilities.html>`_.
    Please have a look at this list. Keep in mind that it is never fully complete or up to date.

#. NeXus files are binary? This is crazy! How am I supposed to see my data?

    Various tools are listed in the :ref:`Utilities` section to inspect
    NeXus data files.  The easiest graphical tool to use is
    *HDFview* which can open any HDF file.  Other tools such as *PyMCA*
    and *NeXPy* provide visualization of scientific data while *h5dump*
    and *punx tree* provide text renditions of content and structure.
    If you want to try, for example
    ``nxbrowse``
    is a utility provided by the NeXus community that can be very
    helpful to those who want to inspect their files and avoid
    graphical applications. For larger data volumes the binary backends
    used with the appropriate tools are by far superior in terms of
    efficiency and speed and most users happily accept that after having
    worked with supersized "human readable" files for a while.

#. What on-disk file format should I choose for my data?

    HDF5 is the default file container to use for NeXus data. It
    is the recommended format for all applications. HDF4 is still
    supported as a on disk format for NeXus but for new installations
    preference should be given to HDF5.

#. Why are the NeXus classes so complicated? I'll never store all that information

    The NeXus classes are essentially glossaries of terms. If you
    need to store a piece of information, consult the class definitions
    to see if it has been defined. If so, use it. It is not compulsory
    to include every item that has been defined in the base class if it
    is not relevant to your experiment. On the other hand, a NeXus
    application definition lists a smaller set of compulsory items that
    should allow other researchers or software to analyze your data.
    You should really follow the application definition that
    corresponds to your experiment to take full advantage of NeXus.

#. I don't like NeXus. It seems much faster and simpler to develop
   my own file format. Why should I even consider NeXus?

    If you consider using an efficient on disk storage format,
    HDF5 is a better choice than most others. It is fast and efficient
    and well supported in all mainstream programming languages and a
    fair share of popular analysis packages. The format is so widely
    used and backed by a big organisation that it will continue to be
    supported for the foreseeable future.
    So if you are going to use HDF5 anyway, why not use the NeXus
    definition to lay out the data in a standardised way? The NeXus
    community spent years trying to get the standard right and
    while you will not agree with every single choice they made in the
    past, you should be able to store the data you have in a quite
    reasonable way. If you do not comply with NeXus, chances are most
    people will perceive your format as different but not necessarily
    better than NeXus by any large measure. So it may not be worth the
    effort. Seriously.

    If you encounter any problems because the classes are not
    sufficient to describe your experiment, please contact the
    :ref:`mailing list<NeXus.mailinglist.main>`.
    Pull requests for the definitions repository (for example adding contributed definitions)
    are also welcome (see next question).
    The NIAC is always willing to consider new proposals.

#. I want to :index:`contribute` an application definition.
    How do I go about it?

    Read the :index:`NXDL` Tutorial in :ref:`NXDL_Tutorial-CreatingNxdlSpec`
    and have a try. You can ask for help on the
    :ref:`mailing lists<NeXus.mailinglist.main>`.
    Once you have a definition that is working well for at least your case,
    you can submit it to the NIAC for acceptance as a standard.
    The procedures for acceptance are defined in the NIAC :index:`constitution`. [#]_


	.. [#]
	    Refer to the most recent version of the NIAC constitution on the
	    NIAC web page:
	    https://www.nexusformat.org/NIAC.html#constitution


#. What is the purpose of ``NXdata``?

    ``NXdata`` identifies the :index:`default plottable data <plotting>`.
    This is one of the basic motivations (see :ref:`SimplePlotting`) for the NeXus standard.
    The choice of the name ``NXdata`` is historic and does not really reflect its function.
    The ``NXdata`` group contains data or links to the data stored elsewhere.

#. How do I identify the plottable data?

    See the section: :ref:`Find-Plottable-Data`.

    .. TODO:  What is the intent of this next question?  What defines "reasonable" in this context?
       #. How can I specify reasonable axes for my data?

           ..  Is there a better answer for this?
       	    FIXME: This link leads to the naming rules, not axes specification.  Change it.

           See the section: :ref:`multi-dimensional-data`.

           .. :ref:`DataRules`.

#. Why aren't ``NXsample`` and ``NXmonitor`` groups stored in the ``NXinstrument`` group?

    A NeXus file can contain a number of ``NXentry``
    groups, which may represent different scans in an experiment, or
    sample and calibration runs, etc. In many cases, though by no means
    all, the instrument has the same configuration so that it would be
    possible to save space by storing the  ``NXinstrument``
    group once and using multiple links in the remaining ``NXentry``
    groups. It is assumed that the sample and monitor information would
    be more likely to change from run to run, and so should be stored
    at the top level.

#. Can I use a NXDL specification to parse a NeXus data file?

    This should be possible as there is nothing in the NeXus
    specifications to prevent this but it is not implemented in :index:`NAPI`.
    You would need to implement it for yourself.

#. Do I have to use the ``NAPI`` subroutines?
   Can't I read (or write) the NeXus data files with my own routines?

    You are not required to use the NAPI to write valid NeXus
    data files. It is possible to avoid the NAPI to write and read
    valid NeXus data files. But, the programmer who chooses this path
    must have more understanding of how the NeXus HDF data file
    is written. Validation of data files written without the NAPI is
    strongly encouraged.


#. I'm using links to place data in two places.
   Which one should be the data and which one is the link?

    .. index:: link

    .. note:: NeXus uses HDF5 hard links

	    In HDF, a hard link points to a data object.
	    A soft link points to a directory entry.
	    Since NeXus uses hard links, there is no need to distinguish
	    between two (or more) directory entries that point to the same data.

    Both places have pointers to the actual data.
    That is the way hard links work in HDF5.
    There is no need for a preference to either location.
    NeXus defines a ``target`` attribute to label
    one directory entry as the source of the data (in this, the
    link *target*).  This has value in
    only a few situations such as when
    converting the data from one format to another.  By identifying
    the original in place, duplicate copies of the data are not
    converted.

#. If I write my data according to the current specification for :ref:`NXsas`
    (substitute any other application definition),
    will other software be able to read my data?

    Yes.  :ref:`NXsas`, like other
    :ref:`application.definitions`,
    defines and names the *minimum information*
    required for analysis or data processing.  As long as all the
    information required by the specification is present, analysis software
    should be able to process the data.
    If other information is also present, there is no guarantee that
    small-angle scattering analysis software will notice.

#. Where do I store the wavelength of my experiment?

    See the :ref:`Strategies-wavelength` section.

#. Where do I store metadata about my experiment?

   See the :ref:`where.to.store.metadata` section.

#. What file extension should I use when writing a NeXus data file?

   Any extension is permitted.
   Common extensions are `.h5`, `.hdf`, `.hdf5`, and `.nxs`
   while others are possible.
   See the many examples in the NeXus exampledata repository.
   (https://github.com/nexusformat/exampledata)

#. Can instances of classes inside definitions require
   new fields that were previously optional?

   Yes. That is one of the motivations to have
   application definitions. By default, all content
   in an application definition is required.

   For example, the ``radiation`` field in :ref:`NXcanSAS`
   requires 1 (and only 1) instance.

#. Can instances of classes inside definitions make
   optional new fields that were previously not mentioned?

   Yes. To make it optional, set attribute ``minOccurs="0"``.

   For example, see the ``Idev`` field in :ref:`NXcanSAS`.

#. Can instances of classes inside definitions require
   new fields that were previously not mentioned?

   Yes.

   For example, see the ``qx`` field in :ref:`NXiqproc`.

#. Can we view the process of defining classes within
   an application definition as defining a subclass of
   the original class? That is, all instances of the
   class within the definition are valid instances of
   the original class, but not vice-versa?

   Yes.  When writing an application definition, you can
   add additional metadata to base classes that are not in the
   base class definition. This essentially sub-classes the
   original base class.

   This is different than using the ``extends`` attribute, which
   can be used to make new base classes that inherit the properties
   of the parent classes, or new application definitions that use
   another as a starting point. For example the
   ``NXelectron_detector`` base class extends the ``NXdetector``
   base class::

     <definition category="base" name="NXelectron_detector" extends="NXdetector">

   This is similar to how the application definition ``NXdirecttof`` extends
   the ``NXtofraw`` application definition::

     <definition category="application" name="NXdirecttof" extends="NXtofraw">

   Most NXDL files extend the :ref:`NXobject` base class (the base object
   of NeXus).
