manual/source/index.rst, before:

.. image:: img/NeXus.png
	:width: 40%

=======================================
User Manual and Reference Documentation
=======================================

https://www.nexusformat.org/

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2
    :numbered: 4

    user_manual
    examples/index
    ref_doc
    napi
    community
    installation
    utilities
    history
    docs_about

-----------

.. rubric:: Publishing Information

This manual built |today|.  

.. seealso:: 

   This document is available in these formats online:
   
   :HTML:
   	https://manual.nexusformat.org/

   :PDF:
   	https://manual.nexusformat.org/_static/NeXusManual.pdf

   A very brief overview (title: *NeXus for the Impatient*) 
   is also available (separate from the manual).
   
   :HTML:
      https://manual.nexusformat.org/impatient/

   :PDF:
      https://manual.nexusformat.org/_static/NXImpatient.pdf

..  Suggestions for adding to this manual:

    Look for some other "section" such as "introduction.rst" and act similarly.
    Any examples go as text files in the examples/ subdirectory and are pulled into 
    Sphinx inside a :directive:`literalcode` directive.  Look for the pattern
    or wing it.  If you are ambitious, add index entries.  Many examples of the
    constructs you might use are already in the manual.

Commit message:

restore pages for FAIRmat proposal site
# Conflicts:
#	manual/source/conf.py

manual/source/index.rst, after:

=======================================
User Manual and Reference Documentation
=======================================

Welcome to the user manual of the NeXus for FAIRmat project.

https://www.nexusformat.org/

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 2

    fairmat-cover
    nexus-index
    em-structure
    mpes-structure
    ellipsometry-structure
    apm-structure
    transport-structure
    stm-structure
    cgms-structure
    laboratory-structure
    north-structure



-----------

.. rubric:: Publishing Information

| This commit time code <<AUTO_INJECT_COMMIT_TC>>.
| This commit identifier <<AUTO_INJECT_COMMIT_ID>>.
| This manual built |today|.


.. seealso:: 

   The extended NeXus documentation:
   
   :HTML:
   	https://manual.nexusformat.org/

   :PDF:
   	https://manual.nexusformat.org/_static/NeXusManual.pdf

   A very brief overview (title: *NeXus for the Impatient*) 
   is also available (separate from the manual).
   
   :HTML:
      https://manual.nexusformat.org/impatient/

   :PDF:
      https://manual.nexusformat.org/_static/NXImpatient.pdf

   FAIRmat website:

   `<https://www.fair-di.eu/fairmat/fairmat_/consortium>`_

   NOMAD website:

   `<https://nomad-lab.eu/>`_
